# C3POa
Computational pipeline for calling consensi on R2C2 nanopore data.

### Dependencies ###
- [Python 3.6](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
- [NumPy 1.13.3](https://scipy.org/install.html)
- [poa v1.0.0 Revision: 1.2.2.9](https://github.com/tanghaibao/bio-pipeline)
- [EMBOSS water: watHerON v8](https://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~rvolden/C3POa/EMBOSS-6.6.0_v8.tar.gz)
- [minimap2 2.7-r654](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2)
- [racon](https://github.com/isovic/racon)
- [blat source](https://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~kent/src/blatSrc35.zip) or [blat executable](http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/admin/exe/)

To install dependencies, use setup.sh.  
setup.sh will download and make all of the packages that you need to run C3POa (except Python, NumPy and blat).  
You don't need to have these in your PATH, but if you don't, you'll need to use a [config file](example_config).
```bash
chmod +x setup.sh
./setup.sh
```

To install NumPy, you can go [here](https://scipy.org/install.html).  
Otherwise, you can use your computer's package manager (apt-get, dnf, brew, etc.) to install.  
Pip3 is another option for NumPy installation.  
Example:
```bash
sudo dnf install python3-numpy
```
or
```bash
pip3 install numpy
```

For blat, there are a couple options. You can build from [source](https://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~kent/src/blatSrc35.zip) or you can get an [executable](http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/admin/exe/). Please follow the documentation in the blat readme for make instructions.

### Usage ###
After resolving all of the dependencies, you can run C3POa with python.

### C3POa_preprocessing.py ###

Takes raw 1D nanopore R2C2 reads in fastq format, removes low quality and short reads and then finds splint sequences in those reads using BLAT. It then adds the position of the splint to the read name and generates separate folders each containing a fastq file containing 4000 raw reads.

Options (All required):

  -i  raw reads in fastq format

  -o  path where a splint_reads folder with the output files will be generated

  -q  only reads above this average quality will be retained (9 is recommended)

  -l  only reads longer than this number will be retained (1000 recommended)

  -s  sequence of DNA splint used in R2C2 protocol in fasta format. Sequence name must contained the string 'Splint'

  -c  config file containing path to BLAT binary (format example: blat[tab]/path/to/blat)


```bash
python3 C3POa_preprocessing.py -i raw_reads.fastq -o output_path -q quality_cutoff -l read_length_cutoff -s Splint_sequence.fasta
```

Example input read:
```
@63f115bc-6a91-42bd-a78a-667fd8255069
ACAGTCGATCATAGCTTAGCATGCATCGACGATCGATCGATCGA
+
"01&%"."I;"CSA"qr{X"uvc"\n"ggZ"Swj"yq"{wD"{z
```

Example output read (10 would be a splint position):
```
@63f115bc-6a91-42bd-a78a-667fd8255069_10
ACAGTCGATCATAGCTTAGCATGCATCGACGATCGATCGATCGA
+
"01&%"."I;"CSA"qr{X"uvc"\n"ggZ"Swj"yq"{wD"{z
```

### C3POa.py ###

Takes fastq output produced by C3POa_preprocessing.py and generates consensus sequences in fasta format and a subread sequences in fastq format.

Options:

  -p  directory to which all temporary files will be written. Defaults to your current directory.

  -m  path to NUC.4.4.mat file (included in repository)

  -l  raw sequence length cutoff. Defaults to 1000

  -d  median distance between peaks cutoff. This should be the length of your shortest input sequence in your library preparation. Defaults to 500

  -c  config file containing paths to poa, racon, water, blat, and minimap2. (format example poa[tab]/path/to/poa)

  -o  name (including path) of fasta file that the consensus gets written to. Defaults to R2C2_Consensus.fasta

  -r  fastq file that contains reads generated by C3POa_preprocessing.py


```bash
python3 C3POa.py -r preprocessed_reads.fastq -p outpath -m path/to/NUC.4.4.mat -s 1000 -d 500 -c /path/to/config_file -o /path/to/consensus.fasta
```

Timing things and excluding zero repeat reads:
```bash
python3 C3POa.py -t -z -r preprocessed_reads.fastq -p outpath -m path/to/NUC.4.4.mat -s 1000 -d 500 -c /path/to/config_file -o /path/to/consensus.fasta
```
When you include -t (--timer), water, poa, racon, and consensus.py will be timed (times are directed to stdout).

When you include -z (--zero), C3POa will exclude zero repeat reads.

Example output read (readName_averageQuality_originalReadLength_numberOfRepeats_subreadLength):
```
>efbfbf09-7e2b-48e6-8e57-b3d36886739c_46.53_5798_2_1844
ACAGTCGATCATAGCTTAGCATGCATCGACGATCGATCGATCGA...
```

### C3POa_postprocessing.py ###

Trims and reorients consensus sequences generated by C3POa.py to 5'->3' direction

  -i  fasta file containing consensus sequences generated by C3POa.py

  -o  directory which output files will be written to

  -a  sequence of cDNA adapter sequences in fasta format. Sequence names must be 3Prime_adapter and 5Prime_adapter

  -c  config file containing path to BLAT binary (format example: blat[tab]/path/to/blat)

  -z  option to include/exclude zero repeat reads.

```bash
python3 C3POa_postprocessing.py -i /path/to/consensus.fasta -o out_path -c /path/to/config_file -a /path/to/adapter.fasta
```

**About zero repeat reads:** Zero repeat reads are reads that contain
a splint with incomplete portions of your original molecule on each side.
If there's an overlap, C3POa will align the portions that overlap and
concatenate the rest of the read together to try and make a contiguous
read. These reads are very similar to normal 1D reads, but there are a few
cases where there is a slight improvement. There is an option to remove
these reads in postprocessing.
